Lorenz Attractor
A minimal exploration of a classical chaotic system

This repository contains a self-contained Julia script that numerically integrates the Lorenz system and produces the characteristic three-dimensional butterfly trajectory.

The goal is intentionally minimalistic and pedagogical:

no heavy dependencies (only Plots.jl),

no premature optimization,

no unnecessary abstractions.

Just the original Lorenz equations (1963), implemented in roughly 60 clear and readable lines of code.

1. Historical background

In 1961, meteorologist Edward N. Lorenz at MIT was running a 12-variable atmospheric model on a Royal McBee LGP-30 computer.
To save time, he restarted a simulation from an intermediate point, manually re-entering values rounded to three decimal places instead of the six stored internally.

To his surprise, the new forecast diverged completely within a few simulated days.

This accidental experiment revealed what is now known as sensitive dependence on initial conditions, a defining feature of deterministic chaos.

By 1963, Lorenz had distilled this phenomenon into the simplest dissipative system capable of producing aperiodic deterministic flow.
The resulting equations became the canonical toy model of chaos theory.

2. The Lorenz system

The governing ordinary differential equations are

dx/dt = σ (y − x)
dy/dt = x (ρ − z) − y
dz/dt = x y − β z


with the classical parameter values

σ = 10        (Prandtl number)
ρ = 28        (reduced Rayleigh number)
β = 8 / 3     (geometric factor)

Dynamical regimes

0 < ρ < 1: the origin is globally stable.

ρ = 1: a pitchfork bifurcation creates two nontrivial fixed points.

ρ > 24.74: these fixed points become unstable and almost all trajectories are attracted to a strange attractor.

The Lorenz attractor is fractal, bounded, and non-periodic, with an estimated dimension of approximately 2.06.

3. Key dynamical properties

Volume contraction
The divergence of the vector field is constant and negative:

∇·F = −(σ + 1 + β) < 0


As a result, phase-space volumes contract exponentially.

Discrete symmetry
The system is invariant under the transformation

(x, y, z) → (−x, −y, z)


Sensitive dependence on initial conditions
Trajectories initially separated by approximately 10⁻⁶ diverge after roughly 15 time units.

4. Numerical integration

The system is integrated using forward Euler with time step

Δt = 0.02


This choice is sufficient to preserve the geometry of the attractor over short integration times (30 time units, 1,500 steps).
For quantitative analysis, higher-order or adaptive methods are recommended.

5. Julia implementation

The file lorenz.jl defines the system state and advances it using an in-place stepping function.
The trajectory is visualized using Plots.jl and rendered as an animated GIF.

anim = @animate for i in 1:1_500
    step!(attractor)
    push!(plt, attractor.x, attractor.y, attractor.z)
end every 10

gif(anim, "lorenz.gif")

6. Reproducing the figure

Install Julia 1.9 or newer.

Clone the repository and enter the directory:

git clone <repository-url>
cd <repository>


Run:

julia lorenz.jl


Open lorenz.gif.

7. Further exploration

Set ρ = 24.1 to observe the collapse of transient chaos.

Increase Δt to study numerical instability.

Replace Euler integration with DifferentialEquations.jl and compute Lyapunov exponents.

Color the trajectory by the instantaneous value of z.

8. References

E. N. Lorenz, Deterministic nonperiodic flow,
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 20 (1963), 130–141.

C. Sparrow, The Lorenz Equations: Bifurcations, Chaos, and Strange Attractors,
Springer, 1982.

Three simple equations, a few lines of code,
and a lifetime of deterministic chaos.
